                               THE VALLEY OF FEAR

                               Arthur Conan Doyle







                                Table of contents

         Part I
        The Warning
        Sherlock Holmes Discourses
        The Tragedy of Birlstone







                                      PART I

                            The Tragedy of Birlstone





          CHAPTER I
          The Warning


     "I am inclined to think--" said I.

     "I should do so," Sherlock Holmes remarked impatiently.

     I believe that I am one of the most long-suffering of mortals; but
     I'll admit that I was annoyed at the sardonic interruption.

     "Really, Holmes," said I severely, "you are a little trying at
     times."

     He was too much absorbed with his own thoughts to give any immediate
     answer to my remonstrance. He leaned upon his hand, with his untasted
     breakfast before him, and he stared at the slip of paper which he had
     just drawn from its envelope. Then he took the envelope itself, held
     it up to the light, and very carefully studied both the exterior and
     the flap.

     "It is Porlock's writing," said he thoughtfully. "I can hardly doubt
     that it is Porlock's writing, though I have seen it only twice
     before. The Greek e with the peculiar top flourish is distinctive.
     But if it is Porlock, then it must be something of the very first
     importance."

     He was speaking to himself rather than to me; but my vexation
     disappeared in the interest which the words awakened.

     "Who then is Porlock?" I asked.

     "Porlock, Watson, is a nom-de-plume, a mere identification mark; but
     behind it lies a shifty and evasive personality. In a former letter
     he frankly informed me that the name was not his own, and defied me
     ever to trace him among the teeming millions of this great city.
     Porlock is important, not for himself, but for the great man with
     whom he is in touch. Picture to yourself the pilot fish with the
     shark, the jackal with the lion--anything that is insignificant in
     companionship with what is formidable: not only formidable, Watson,
     but sinister--in the highest degree sinister. That is where he comes
     within my purview. You have heard me speak of Professor Moriarty?"

     "The famous scientific criminal, as famous among crooks as--"

     "My blushes, Watson!" Holmes murmured in a deprecating voice.

     "I was about to say, as he is unknown to the public."

     "A touch! A distinct touch!" cried Holmes. "You are developing a
     certain unexpected vein of pawky humour, Watson, against which I must
     learn to guard myself. But in calling Moriarty a criminal you are
     uttering libel in the eyes of the law--and there lie the glory and
     the wonder of it! The greatest schemer of all time, the organizer of
     every deviltry, the controlling brain of the underworld, a brain
     which might have made or marred the destiny of nations--that's the
     man! But so aloof is he from general suspicion, so immune from
     criticism, so admirable in his management and self-effacement, that
     for those very words that you have uttered he could hale you to a
     court and emerge with your year's pension as a solatium for his
     wounded character. Is he not the celebrated author of The Dynamics of
     an Asteroid, a book which ascends to such rarefied heights of pure
     mathematics that it is said that there was no man in the scientific
     press capable of criticizing it? Is this a man to traduce?
     Foul-mouthed doctor and slandered professor--such would be your
     respective roles! That's genius, Watson. But if I am spared by lesser
     men, our day will surely come."

     "May I be there to see!" I exclaimed devoutly. "But you were speaking
     of this man Porlock."

     "Ah, yes--the so-called Porlock is a link in the chain some little
     way from its great attachment. Porlock is not quite a sound
     link--between ourselves. He is the only flaw in that chain so far as
     I have been able to test it."

     "But no chain is stronger than its weakest link."

     "Exactly, my dear Watson! Hence the extreme importance of Porlock.
     Led on by some rudimentary aspirations towards right, and encouraged
     by the judicious stimulation of an occasional ten-pound note sent to
     him by devious methods, he has once or twice given me advance
     information which has been of value--that highest value which
     anticipates and prevents rather than avenges crime. I cannot doubt
     that, if we had the cipher, we should find that this communication is
     of the nature that I indicate."

     Again Holmes flattened out the paper upon his unused plate. I rose
     and, leaning over him, stared down at the curious inscription, which
     ran as follows:

                         534 C2 13 127 36 31 4 17 21 41
                         DOUGLAS 109 293 5 37 BIRLSTONE
                              26 BIRLSTONE 9 47 171

     "What do you make of it, Holmes?"

     "It is obviously an attempt to convey secret information."

     "But what is the use of a cipher message without the cipher?"

     "In this instance, none at all."

     "Why do you say 'in this instance'?"

     "Because there are many ciphers which I would read as easily as I do
     the apocrypha of the agony column: such crude devices amuse the
     intelligence without fatiguing it. But this is different. It is
     clearly a reference to the words in a page of some book. Until I am
     told which page and which book I am powerless."

     "But why 'Douglas' and 'Birlstone'?"

     "Clearly because those are words which were not contained in the page
     in question."

     "Then why has he not indicated the book?"

     "Your native shrewdness, my dear Watson, that innate cunning which is
     the delight of your friends, would surely prevent you from inclosing
     cipher and message in the same envelope. Should it miscarry, you are
     undone. As it is, both have to go wrong before any harm comes from
     it. Our second post is now overdue, and I shall be surprised if it
     does not bring us either a further letter of explanation, or, as is
     more probable, the very volume to which these figures refer."

     Holmes's calculation was fulfilled within a very few minutes by the
     appearance of Billy, the page, with the very letter which we were
     expecting.

     "The same writing," remarked Holmes, as he opened the envelope, "and
     actually signed," he added in an exultant voice as he unfolded the
     epistle. "Come, we are getting on, Watson." His brow clouded,
     however, as he glanced over the contents.

     "Dear me, this is very disappointing! I fear, Watson, that all our
     expectations come to nothing. I trust that the man Porlock will come
     to no harm.

     "Dear Mr. Holmes [he says]:
     "I will go no further in this matter. It is too dangerous--he
     suspects me. I can see that he suspects me. He came to me quite
     unexpectedly after I had actually addressed this envelope with the
     intention of sending you the key to the cipher. I was able to cover
     it up. If he had seen it, it would have gone hard with me. But I read
     suspicion in his eyes. Please burn the cipher message, which can now
     be of no use to you.
     "Fred Porlock."

     Holmes sat for some little time twisting this letter between his
     fingers, and frowning, as he stared into the fire.

     "After all," he said at last, "there may be nothing in it. It may be
     only his guilty conscience. Knowing himself to be a traitor, he may
     have read the accusation in the other's eyes."

     "The other being, I presume, Professor Moriarty."

     "No less! When any of that party talk about 'He' you know whom they
     mean. There is one predominant 'He' for all of them."

     "But what can he do?"

     "Hum! That's a large question. When you have one of the first brains
     of Europe up against you, and all the powers of darkness at his back,
     there are infinite possibilities. Anyhow, Friend Porlock is evidently
     scared out of his senses--kindly compare the writing in the note to
     that upon its envelope; which was done, he tells us, before this
     ill-omened visit. The one is clear and firm. The other hardly
     legible."

     "Why did he write at all? Why did he not simply drop it?"

     "Because he feared I would make some inquiry after him in that case,
     and possibly bring trouble on him."

     "No doubt," said I. "Of course." I had picked up the original cipher
     message and was bending my brows over it. "It's pretty maddening to
     think that an important secret may lie here on this slip of paper,
     and that it is beyond human power to penetrate it."

     Sherlock Holmes had pushed away his untasted breakfast and lit the
     unsavoury pipe which was the companion of his deepest meditations. "I
     wonder!" said he, leaning back and staring at the ceiling. "Perhaps
     there are points which have escaped your Machiavellian intellect. Let
     us consider the problem in the light of pure reason. This man's
     reference is to a book. That is our point of departure."

     "A somewhat vague one."

     "Let us see then if we can narrow it down. As I focus my mind upon
     it, it seems rather less impenetrable. What indications have we as to
     this book?"

     "None."

     "Well, well, it is surely not quite so bad as that. The cipher
     message begins with a large 534, does it not? We may take it as a
     working hypothesis that 534 is the particular page to which the
     cipher refers. So our book has already become a large book which is
     surely something gained. What other indications have we as to the
     nature of this large book? The next sign is C2. What do you make of
     that, Watson?"

     "Chapter the second, no doubt."

     "Hardly that, Watson. You will, I am sure, agree with me that if the
     page be given, the number of the chapter is immaterial. Also that if
     page 534 finds us only in the second chapter, the length of the first
     one must have been really intolerable."

     "Column!" I cried.

     "Brilliant, Watson. You are scintillating this morning. If it is not
     column, then I am very much deceived. So now, you see, we begin to
     visualize a large book printed in double columns which are each of a
     considerable length, since one of the words is numbered in the
     document as the two hundred and ninety-third. Have we reached the
     limits of what reason can supply?"

     "I fear that we have."

     "Surely you do yourself an injustice. One more coruscation, my dear
     Watson--yet another brain-wave! Had the volume been an unusual one,
     he would have sent it to me. Instead of that, he had intended, before
     his plans were nipped, to send me the clue in this envelope. He says
     so in his note. This would seem to indicate that the book is one
     which he thought I would have no difficulty in finding for myself. He
     had it--and he imagined that I would have it, too. In short, Watson,
     it is a very common book."

     "What you say certainly sounds plausible."

     "So we have contracted our field of search to a large book, printed
     in double columns and in common use."

     "The Bible!" I cried triumphantly.

     "Good, Watson, good! But not, if I may say so, quite good enough!
     Even if I accepted the compliment for myself I could hardly name any
     volume which would be less likely to lie at the elbow of one of
     Moriarty's associates. Besides, the editions of Holy Writ are so
     numerous that he could hardly suppose that two copies would have the
     same pagination. This is clearly a book which is standardized. He
     knows for certain that his page 534 will exactly agree with my page
     534."

     "But very few books would correspond with that."

     "Exactly. Therein lies our salvation. Our search is narrowed down to
     standardized books which anyone may be supposed to possess."

     "Bradshaw!"

     "There are difficulties, Watson. The vocabulary of Bradshaw is
     nervous and terse, but limited. The selection of words would hardly
     lend itself to the sending of general messages. We will eliminate
     Bradshaw. The dictionary is, I fear, inadmissible for the same
     reason. What then is left?"

     "An almanac!"

     "Excellent, Watson! I am very much mistaken if you have not touched
     the spot. An almanac! Let us consider the claims of Whitaker's
     Almanac. It is in common use. It has the requisite number of pages.
     It is in double column. Though reserved in its earlier vocabulary, it
     becomes, if I remember right, quite garrulous towards the end." He
     picked the volume from his desk. "Here is page 534, column two, a
     substantial block of print dealing, I perceive, with the trade and
     resources of British India. Jot down the words, Watson! Number
     thirteen is 'Mahratta.' Not, I fear, a very auspicious beginning.
     Number one hundred and twenty-seven is 'Government'; which at least
     makes sense, though somewhat irrelevant to ourselves and Professor
     Moriarty. Now let us try again. What does the Mahratta government do?
     Alas! the next word is 'pig's-bristles.' We are undone, my good
     Watson! It is finished!"

     He had spoken in jesting vein, but the twitching of his bushy
     eyebrows bespoke his disappointment and irritation. I sat helpless
     and unhappy, staring into the fire. A long silence was broken by a
     sudden exclamation from Holmes, who dashed at a cupboard, from which
     he emerged with a second yellow-covered volume in his hand.

     "We pay the price, Watson, for being too up-to-date!" he cried. "We
     are before our time, and suffer the usual penalties. Being the
     seventh of January, we have very properly laid in the new almanac. It
     is more than likely that Porlock took his message from the old one.
     No doubt he would have told us so had his letter of explanation been
     written. Now let us see what page 534 has in store for us. Number
     thirteen is 'There,' which is much more promising. Number one hundred
     and twenty-seven is 'is'--'There is'"--Holmes's eyes were gleaming
     with excitement, and his thin, nervous fingers twitched as he counted
     the words--"'danger.' Ha! Ha! Capital! Put that down, Watson. 'There
     is danger-- may-- come-- very-- soon-- one.' Then we have the name
     'Douglas' --'rich-- country-- now-- at-- Birlstone-- House--
     Birlstone-- confidence-- is-- pressing.' There, Watson! What do you
     think of pure reason and its fruit? If the greengrocer had such a
     thing as a laurel wreath, I should send Billy round for it."

     I was staring at the strange message which I had scrawled, as he
     deciphered it, upon a sheet of foolscap on my knee.

     "What a queer, scrambling way of expressing his meaning!" said I.

     "On the contrary, he has done quite remarkably well," said Holmes.
     "When you search a single column for words with which to express your
     meaning, you can hardly expect to get everything you want. You are
     bound to leave something to the intelligence of your correspondent.
     The purport is perfectly clear. Some deviltry is intended against one
     Douglas, whoever he may be, residing as stated, a rich country
     gentleman. He is sure--'confidence' was as near as he could get to
     'confident'--that it is pressing. There is our result--and a very
     workmanlike little bit of analysis it was!"

     Holmes had the impersonal joy of the true artist in his better work,
     even as he mourned darkly when it fell below the high level to which
     he aspired. He was still chuckling over his success when Billy swung
     open the door and Inspector MacDonald of Scotland Yard was ushered
     into the room.

     Those were the early days at the end of the '80's, when Alec
     MacDonald was far from having attained the national fame which he has
     now achieved. He was a young but trusted member of the detective
     force, who had distinguished himself in several cases which had been
     entrusted to him. His tall, bony figure gave promise of exceptional
     physical strength, while his great cranium and deep-set, lustrous
     eyes spoke no less clearly of the keen intelligence which twinkled
     out from behind his bushy eyebrows. He was a silent, precise man with
     a dour nature and a hard Aberdonian accent.

     Twice already in his career had Holmes helped him to attain success,
     his own sole reward being the intellectual joy of the problem. For
     this reason the affection and respect of the Scotchman for his
     amateur colleague were profound, and he showed them by the frankness
     with which he consulted Holmes in every difficulty. Mediocrity knows
     nothing higher than itself; but talent instantly recognizes genius,
     and MacDonald had talent enough for his profession to enable him to
     perceive that there was no humiliation in seeking the assistance of
     one who already stood alone in Europe, both in his gifts and in his
     experience. Holmes was not prone to friendship, but he was tolerant
     of the big Scotchman, and smiled at the sight of him.

     "You are an early bird, Mr. Mac," said he. "I wish you luck with your
     worm. I fear this means that there is some mischief afoot."

     "If you said 'hope' instead of 'fear,' it would be nearer the truth,
     I'm thinking, Mr. Holmes," the inspector answered, with a knowing
     grin. "Well, maybe a wee nip would keep out the raw morning chill.
     No, I won't smoke, I thank you. I'll have to be pushing on my way;
     for the early hours of a case are the precious ones, as no man knows
     better than your own self. But--but--"

     The inspector had stopped suddenly, and was staring with a look of
     absolute amazement at a paper upon the table. It was the sheet upon
     which I had scrawled the enigmatic message.

     "Douglas!" he stammered. "Birlstone! What's this, Mr. Holmes? Man,
     it's witchcraft! Where in the name of all that is wonderful did you
     get those names?"

     "It is a cipher that Dr. Watson and I have had occasion to solve. But
     why--what's amiss with the names?"

     The inspector looked from one to the other of us in dazed
     astonishment. "Just this," said he, "that Mr. Douglas of Birlstone
     Manor House was horribly murdered last night!"





          CHAPTER II
          Sherlock Holmes Discourses


     It was one of those dramatic moments for which my friend existed. It
     would be an overstatement to say that he was shocked or even excited
     by the amazing announcement. Without having a tinge of cruelty in his
     singular composition, he was undoubtedly callous from long
     over-stimulation. Yet, if his emotions were dulled, his intellectual
     perceptions were exceedingly active. There was no trace then of the
     horror which I had myself felt at this curt declaration; but his face
     showed rather the quiet and interested composure of the chemist who
     sees the crystals falling into position from his oversaturated
     solution.

     "Remarkable!" said he. "Remarkable!"

     "You don't seem surprised."

     "Interested, Mr. Mac, but hardly surprised. Why should I be
     surprised? I receive an anonymous communication from a quarter which
     I know to be important, warning me that danger threatens a certain
     person. Within an hour I learn that this danger has actually
     materialized and that the person is dead. I am interested; but, as
     you observe, I am not surprised."

     In a few short sentences he explained to the inspector the facts
     about the letter and the cipher. MacDonald sat with his chin on his
     hands and his great sandy eyebrows bunched into a yellow tangle.

     "I was going down to Birlstone this morning," said he. "I had come to
     ask you if you cared to come with me--you and your friend here. But
     from what you say we might perhaps be doing better work in London."

     "I rather think not," said Holmes.

     "Hang it all, Mr. Holmes!" cried the inspector. "The papers will be
     full of the Birlstone mystery in a day or two; but where's the
     mystery if there is a man in London who prophesied the crime before
     ever it occurred? We have only to lay our hands on that man, and the
     rest will follow."

     "No doubt, Mr. Mac. But how do you propose to lay your hands on the
     so-called Porlock?"

     MacDonald turned over the letter which Holmes had handed him. "Posted
     in Camberwell--that doesn't help us much. Name, you say, is assumed.
     Not much to go on, certainly. Didn't you say that you have sent him
     money?"

     "Twice."

     "And how?"

     "In notes to Camberwell post-office."

     "Did you ever trouble to see who called for them?"

     "No."

     The inspector looked surprised and a little shocked. "Why not?"

     "Because I always keep faith. I had promised when he first wrote that
     I would not try to trace him."

     "You think there is someone behind him?"

     "I know there is."

     "This professor that I've heard you mention?"

     "Exactly!"

     Inspector MacDonald smiled, and his eyelid quivered as he glanced
     towards me. "I won't conceal from you, Mr. Holmes, that we think in
     the C. I. D. that you have a wee bit of a bee in your bonnet over
     this professor. I made some inquiries myself about the matter. He
     seems to be a very respectable, learned, and talented sort of man."

     "I'm glad you've got so far as to recognize the talent."

     "Man, you can't but recognize it! After I heard your view I made it
     my business to see him. I had a chat with him on eclipses. How the
     talk got that way I canna think; but he had out a reflector lantern
     and a globe, and made it all clear in a minute. He lent me a book;
     but I don't mind saying that it was a bit above my head, though I had
     a good Aberdeen upbringing. He'd have made a grand meenister with his
     thin face and gray hair and solemn-like way of talking. When he put
     his hand on my shoulder as we were parting, it was like a father's
     blessing before you go out into the cold, cruel world."

     Holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands. "Great!" he said. "Great! Tell
     me, Friend MacDonald, this pleasing and touching interview was, I
     suppose, in the professor's study?"

     "That's so."

     "A fine room, is it not?"

     "Very fine--very handsome indeed, Mr. Holmes."

     "You sat in front of his writing desk?"

     "Just so."

     "Sun in your eyes and his face in the shadow?"

     "Well, it was evening; but I mind that the lamp was turned on my
     face."

     "It would be. Did you happen to observe a picture over the
     professor's head?"

     "I don't miss much, Mr. Holmes. Maybe I learned that from you. Yes, I
     saw the picture--a young woman with her head on her hands, peeping at
     you sideways."

     "That painting was by Jean Baptiste Greuze."

     The inspector endeavoured to look interested.

     "Jean Baptiste Greuze," Holmes continued, joining his finger tips and
     leaning well back in his chair, "was a French artist who flourished
     between the years 1750 and 1800. I allude, of course to his working
     career. Modern criticism has more than indorsed the high opinion
     formed of him by his contemporaries."

     The inspector's eyes grew abstracted. "Hadn't we better--" he said.

     "We are doing so," Holmes interrupted. "All that I am saying has a
     very direct and vital bearing upon what you have called the Birlstone
     Mystery. In fact, it may in a sense be called the very centre of it."

     MacDonald smiled feebly, and looked appealingly to me. "Your thoughts
     move a bit too quick for me, Mr. Holmes. You leave out a link or two,
     and I can't get over the gap. What in the whole wide world can be the
     connection between this dead painting man and the affair at
     Birlstone?"

     "All knowledge comes useful to the detective," remarked Holmes. "Even
     the trivial fact that in the year 1865 a picture by Greuze entitled
     La Jeune Fille a l'Agneau fetched one million two hundred thousand
     francs--more than forty thousand pounds--at the Portalis sale may
     start a train of reflection in your mind."

     It was clear that it did. The inspector looked honestly interested.

     "I may remind you," Holmes continued, "that the professor's salary
     can be ascertained in several trustworthy books of reference. It is
     seven hundred a year."

     "Then how could he buy--"

     "Quite so! How could he?"

     "Ay, that's remarkable," said the inspector thoughtfully. "Talk away,
     Mr. Holmes. I'm just loving it. It's fine!"

     Holmes smiled. He was always warmed by genuine admiration--the
     characteristic of the real artist. "What about Birlstone?" he asked.

     "We've time yet," said the inspector, glancing at his watch. "I've a
     cab at the door, and it won't take us twenty minutes to Victoria. But
     about this picture: I thought you told me once, Mr. Holmes, that you
     had never met Professor Moriarty."

     "No, I never have."

     "Then how do you know about his rooms?"

     "Ah, that's another matter. I have been three times in his rooms,
     twice waiting for him under different pretexts and leaving before he
     came. Once--well, I can hardly tell about the once to an official
     detective. It was on the last occasion that I took the liberty of
     running over his papers--with the most unexpected results."

     "You found something compromising?"

     "Absolutely nothing. That was what amazed me. However, you have now
     seen the point of the picture. It shows him to be a very wealthy man.
     How did he acquire wealth? He is unmarried. His younger brother is a
     station master in the west of England. His chair is worth seven
     hundred a year. And he owns a Greuze."

     "Well?"

     "Surely the inference is plain."

     "You mean that he has a great income and that he must earn it in an
     illegal fashion?"

     "Exactly. Of course I have other reasons for thinking so--dozens of
     exiguous threads which lead vaguely up towards the centre of the web
     where the poisonous, motionless creature is lurking. I only mention
     the Greuze because it brings the matter within the range of your own
     observation."

     "Well, Mr. Holmes, I admit that what you say is interesting: it's
     more than interesting--it's just wonderful. But let us have it a
     little clearer if you can. Is it forgery, coining, burglary--where
     does the money come from?"

     "Have you ever read of Jonathan Wild?"

     "Well, the name has a familiar sound. Someone in a novel, was he not?
     I don't take much stock of detectives in novels--chaps that do things
     and never let you see how they do them. That's just inspiration: not
     business."

     "Jonathan Wild wasn't a detective, and he wasn't in a novel. He was a
     master criminal, and he lived last century--1750 or thereabouts."

     "Then he's no use to me. I'm a practical man."

     "Mr. Mac, the most practical thing that you ever did in your life
     would be to shut yourself up for three months and read twelve hours a
     day at the annals of crime. Everything comes in circles--even
     Professor Moriarty. Jonathan Wild was the hidden force of the London
     criminals, to whom he sold his brains and his organization on a
     fifteen per cent commission. The old wheel turns, and the same spoke
     comes up. It's all been done before, and will be again. I'll tell you
     one or two things about Moriarty which may interest you."

     "You'll interest me, right enough."

     "I happen to know who is the first link in his chain--a chain with
     this Napoleon-gone-wrong at one end, and a hundred broken fighting
     men, pickpockets, blackmailers, and card sharpers at the other, with
     every sort of crime in between. His chief of staff is Colonel
     Sebastian Moran, as aloof and guarded and inaccessible to the law as
     himself. What do you think he pays him?"

     "I'd like to hear."

     "Six thousand a year. That's paying for brains, you see--the American
     business principle. I learned that detail quite by chance. It's more
     than the Prime Minister gets. That gives you an idea of Moriarty's
     gains and of the scale on which he works. Another point: I made it my
     business to hunt down some of Moriarty's checks lately--just common
     innocent checks that he pays his household bills with. They were
     drawn on six different banks. Does that make any impression on your
     mind?"

     "Queer, certainly! But what do you gather from it?"

     "That he wanted no gossip about his wealth. No single man should know
     what he had. I have no doubt that he has twenty banking accounts; the
     bulk of his fortune abroad in the Deutsche Bank or the Credit
     Lyonnais as likely as not. Sometime when you have a year or two to
     spare I commend to you the study of Professor Moriarty."

     Inspector MacDonald had grown steadily more impressed as the
     conversation proceeded. He had lost himself in his interest. Now his
     practical Scotch intelligence brought him back with a snap to the
     matter in hand.

     "He can keep, anyhow," said he. "You've got us side-tracked with your
     interesting anecdotes, Mr. Holmes. What really counts is your remark
     that there is some connection between the professor and the crime.
     That you get from the warning received through the man Porlock. Can
     we for our present practical needs get any further than that?"

     "We may form some conception as to the motives of the crime. It is,
     as I gather from your original remarks, an inexplicable, or at least
     an unexplained, murder. Now, presuming that the source of the crime
     is as we suspect it to be, there might be two different motives. In
     the first place, I may tell you that Moriarty rules with a rod of
     iron over his people. His discipline is tremendous. There is only one
     punishment in his code. It is death. Now we might suppose that this
     murdered man--this Douglas whose approaching fate was known by one of
     the arch-criminal's subordinates--had in some way betrayed the chief.
     His punishment followed, and would be known to all--if only to put
     the fear of death into them."

     "Well, that is one suggestion, Mr. Holmes."

     "The other is that it has been engineered by Moriarty in the ordinary
     course of business. Was there any robbery?"

     "I have not heard."

     "If so, it would, of course, be against the first hypothesis and in
     favour of the second. Moriarty may have been engaged to engineer it
     on a promise of part spoils, or he may have been paid so much down to
     manage it. Either is possible. But whichever it may be, or if it is
     some third combination, it is down at Birlstone that we must seek the
     solution. I know our man too well to suppose that he has left
     anything up here which may lead us to him."

     "Then to Birlstone we must go!" cried MacDonald, jumping from his
     chair. "My word! it's later than I thought. I can give you,
     gentlemen, five minutes for preparation, and that is all."

     "And ample for us both," said Holmes, as he sprang up and hastened to
     change from his dressing gown to his coat. "While we are on our way,
     Mr. Mac, I will ask you to be good enough to tell me all about it."

     "All about it" proved to be disappointingly little, and yet there was
     enough to assure us that the case before us might well be worthy of
     the expert's closest attention. He brightened and rubbed his thin
     hands together as he listened to the meagre but remarkable details. A
     long series of sterile weeks lay behind us, and here at last there
     was a fitting object for those remarkable powers which, like all
     special gifts, become irksome to their owner when they are not in
     use. That razor brain blunted and rusted with inaction.

     Sherlock Holmes's eyes glistened, his pale cheeks took a warmer hue,
     and his whole eager face shone with an inward light when the call for
     work reached him. Leaning forward in the cab, he listened intently to
     MacDonald's short sketch of the problem which awaited us in Sussex.
     The inspector was himself dependent, as he explained to us, upon a
     scribbled account forwarded to him by the milk train in the early
     hours of the morning. White Mason, the local officer, was a personal
     friend, and hence MacDonald had been notified much more promptly than
     is usual at Scotland Yard when provincials need their assistance. It
     is a very cold scent upon which the Metropolitan expert is generally
     asked to run.

     "Dear Inspector MacDonald [said the letter which he read to us]:
     "Official requisition for your services is in separate envelope. This
     is for your private eye. Wire me what train in the morning you can
     get for Birlstone, and I will meet it--or have it met if I am too
     occupied. This case is a snorter. Don't waste a moment in getting
     started. If you can bring Mr. Holmes, please do so; for he will find
     something after his own heart. We would think the whole thing had
     been fixed up for theatrical effect if there wasn't a dead man in the
     middle of it. My word! it is a snorter."

      "Your friend seems to be no fool," remarked Holmes.

     "No, sir, White Mason is a very live man, if I am any judge."

     "Well, have you anything more?"

     "Only that he will give us every detail when we meet."

     "Then how did you get at Mr. Douglas and the fact that he had been
     horribly murdered?"

     "That was in the enclosed official report. It didn't say 'horrible':
     that's not a recognized official term. It gave the name John Douglas.
     It mentioned that his injuries had been in the head, from the
     discharge of a shotgun. It also mentioned the hour of the alarm,
     which was close on to midnight last night. It added that the case was
     undoubtedly one of murder, but that no arrest had been made, and that
     the case was one which presented some very perplexing and
     extraordinary features. That's absolutely all we have at present, Mr.
     Holmes."

     "Then, with your permission, we will leave it at that, Mr. Mac. The
     temptation to form premature theories upon insufficient data is the
     bane of our profession. I can see only two things for certain at
     present--a great brain in London, and a dead man in Sussex. It's the
     chain between that we are going to trace."
