

     "I am inclined to think--" said I.

     "I should do so," Sherlock Holmes remarked impatiently.

     I believe that I am one of the most long-suffering of mortals; but
     I'll admit that I was annoyed at the sardonic interruption.

     "Really, Holmes," said I severely, "you are a little trying at
     times."

     He was too much absorbed with his own thoughts to give any immediate
     answer to my remonstrance. He leaned upon his hand, with his untasted
     breakfast before him, and he stared at the slip of paper which he had
     just drawn from its envelope. Then he took the envelope itself, held
     it up to the light, and very carefully studied both the exterior and
     the flap.

     "It is Porlock's writing," said he thoughtfully. "I can hardly doubt
     that it is Porlock's writing, though I have seen it only twice
     before. The Greek e with the peculiar top flourish is distinctive.
     But if it is Porlock, then it must be something of the very first
     importance."

     He was speaking to himself rather than to me; but my vexation
     disappeared in the interest which the words awakened.

     "Who then is Porlock?" I asked.

     "Porlock, Watson, is a nom-de-plume, a mere identification mark; but
     behind it lies a shifty and evasive personality. In a former letter
     he frankly informed me that the name was not his own, and defied me
     ever to trace him among the teeming millions of this great city.
     Porlock is important, not for himself, but for the great man with
     whom he is in touch. Picture to yourself the pilot fish with the
     shark, the jackal with the lion--anything that is insignificant in
     companionship with what is formidable: not only formidable, Watson,
     but sinister--in the highest degree sinister. That is where he comes
     within my purview. You have heard me speak of Professor Moriarty?"

     "The famous scientific criminal, as famous among crooks as--"

     "My blushes, Watson!" Holmes murmured in a deprecating voice.

     "I was about to say, as he is unknown to the public."

     "A touch! A distinct touch!" cried Holmes. "You are developing a
     certain unexpected vein of pawky humour, Watson, against which I must
     learn to guard myself. But in calling Moriarty a criminal you are
     uttering libel in the eyes of the law--and there lie the glory and
     the wonder of it! The greatest schemer of all time, the organizer of
     every deviltry, the controlling brain of the underworld, a brain
     which might have made or marred the destiny of nations--that's the
     man! But so aloof is he from general suspicion, so immune from
     criticism, so admirable in his management and self-effacement, that
     for those very words that you have uttered he could hale you to a
     court and emerge with your year's pension as a solatium for his
     wounded character. Is he not the celebrated author of The Dynamics of
     an Asteroid, a book which ascends to such rarefied heights of pure
     mathematics that it is said that there was no man in the scientific
     press capable of criticizing it? Is this a man to traduce?
     Foul-mouthed doctor and slandered professor--such would be your
     respective roles! That's genius, Watson. But if I am spared by lesser
     men, our day will surely come."

    